Deciding whether someone is a good tenant or employee is a nontrivial task. It is not uncommon to search for any red flags on websites such as Facebook and Twitter. While using this public information is almost expected, a British startup Score Assured takes this data collection to a whole new level by requiring an applicant to give up the passwords to all of their social media accounts. I will argue that this startup is unethical from a consequence-based perspective.

Utilitarian, or consequence-based ethical system, is based on the principle of maximizing total happiness of all moral agents in the society. Parties involved in the case of Score Assured include the startup's employees, prospective tenants of landlords who use Score Assured, and landlords themselves. Of all the moral agents, prospective tenants are the most negatively affected. By requiring applicants to give Score Assured full access to their social media accounts, the startup aims to gather nonpublic personal information (NPI) in addition to public personal information (PPI), which is accessible without any authentication. The report that is compiled also includes plenty of personal identifying information (PII) such as a profile picture[1]. As a result, many prospective tenants would feel that their privacy is deeply violated. A variety of undisclosed third parties gain access to all the information contained in one's social media account. What is, perhaps, worse, they also get the ability to judge a person based on their look, religious and political views expressed in their posts, as well as individual words taken completely out of context by Score Assured. Thus prospective tenants may experience discrimination, stalking, and unwanted intimate advances from landlords and any third parties having access to the information. In addition, the applicants would also have to spend a substantial amount of their time cleaning up their old posts, and in some extreme cases, may even become victims of fraud, identity theft, or crime due to their NPI basically turning into PPI. As a result, the overall happiness of society substantially decreases.

While tenants are the main party affected, some landlords may also experience negative repercussions as well. Gaining access to such sensitive information, landlords may become prosecuted in jurisdiction such as the U.S., which prohibit discrimination of tenants based on age and pregnancy[1]. As Steve Thornhill, co-founder of Score Assured, put it, "All we can do is give them the information. It’s up to landlords to do the right thing." As a result, this opens several avenues of potential unforeseen legal issues for landlords. A landlord would likely sign up for Score Assured thinking that it would simplify their tenant search and screening, only to find themselves with several lawsuits and damaged reputation. As neither of those are direct consequence of landlords' actions, they would be substantially unhappy.

While it may be clear Score Assured leads to an overall decrease of happiness in the society, it is important to consider counterarguments to that. Thornhill argues that "If you’re living a normal life, then, frankly, you have nothing to worry about."[1] This is a straw man argument, since he ignores all the expressed concerns and makes a general statement without diving into any specifics. In addition, Score Assured shift the question of morality to landlords, who are supposed to "do the right thing."[1] This is a common moral misconception of letting other people think about the morality of one's company or product. While the startup may offer some insights for the landlords, it the benefit of that pales in comparison with the harm it causes to the prospective tenants.

In order to further analyze ethical consequences of Score Assured, it is important to understand what type of data is being collected by the startup and in which ways. As mentioned earlier, the information collected includes all both PPI and NPI with PII ingrained in it. Since the startup prompts the user to give their social media login information, the data is not descriptively private. It is normatively private, since it is not socially acceptable for third parties to obtain such deeply personal information without the user having any other choice. Thus, Score Assured violates both the norms of appropriateness and the norms of distribution. The former are violated since a background check website is not expected to drill into one's personal life. The latter is violated since the applicant is not informed who their data is shared with, in addition to not being able to even obtain the data themselves[1]. An additional concern is the form of data mining used by the startup. It takes words such as "poor" out of contexts and presents them to a potential landlord. This has an immense potential for misrepresentation of the facts, with the applicant being at a disadvantage. Overall, the way Score Assured uses users' data is questionable at best.

Establishing that Score Assured is unethical both in its purpose and methods of dealing with users' data shows a very important policy vacuum in the area of background checks. While there is some existing U.S. law prohibiting tenant discrimination based on their age and pregnancy, the startup manages to avoid any legal hurdles. This situation arises as a result of a conceptual muddle caused by the emergence of online social media and its pervasiveness. As can be seen in the case of Score Assured, informed consent and industry self-regulation still put prospective tenants at a large disadvantage since often refusing to share their private data would result in unconditional denial. Thus there is an urgent need in legislation that prohibits any third parties providing housing, employment, or even financial services from obliging applicants to disclose any of their private social media data and other forms of online information that they would be uncomfortable sharing. Score Assured showed us the problem, and it is only up to us to act to restore the ethics of the background checks industry.

[1]The Washington Post:“Creepy Startup”
