Car emissions testing is an integral aspect of protecting the environment and health of millions of people. In 2015 it became public that a car manufacturer Volkswagen cheated such testing on their diesel cars by deliberately modifying emissions software. I will argue that such actions undertaken by Volkswagen's employees are unethical form duty-based perspective since they failed to fulfill their obligations to customer, governments, and society.

Emissions testing is a form of a moral obligation imposed on car manufacturers by society. This is done in order to prevent harm to people and the environment from various poisonous gases that may be produced by uncompliant cars. From a deontological perspective, it is clear that the actions of Volkswagen as a company are immoral with respect to this obligation. While such big picture is clear, it is harder to place blame on specific people in the company. The emissions software involved in the scandal directly controls the amount of poisonous gases that gets expelled into the atmosphere. Thus, it fits our definition of safety-critical software, being a computer system that may have direct life-threatening impact. Thus, according to the ACM Code of Ethics, Volkswagen's software engineers have a moral obligation not only to comply with the law on emissions, but also do their best to avoid harm to others. However, the ACM Code of Ethics also states that the software engineers have a moral responsibility to honor assigned responsibilities. We may never know whether the initiative to cheat on emissions tests came from management or software engineers themselves. In the scenario it came from above, the engineers had conflicting moral responsibilites if they knew about the harm such cheating may inflict. Thus, depending on what happened at Volkswagen in reality, the software engineers may be morally responsible for the company's unethical behavior.

While it is clear that either management or software engineers at Volkswagen are morally responsible for the actions, it is also vital to establish liability and accountability. Since the company broke the law on emissions, it is fully liable for the damages. This can be seen in the events that followed the discovery of cheating. The company had to pay large fines and recall millions of cars. While assigning responsibility and liability is fairly clear-cut, accountability is determined based on Volkswagen's politics within the company. Since we know that multiple high level executives resigned after the scandal, it is very likely that they were held accountable by other employees for the actions. This still does not answer the question of who decided to cheat. Thus, if it was a specific software engineering department making the decision, it is likely that they were held accountable and fired or punished through some other means internally.

Regardless of the specific assignment of blame, the software engineers were most likely morally permitted to blow the whistle about the emissions software. We can infer from various resignations following the scandal that the management was informed about the emissions cheating in some capacity. The emissions software is safety-critical system and all the internal procedures for reporting the decision were exhausted. This satisfies De George's criteria for being morally permitted to blow the whistle. In addition, since going public would have avoided the scandal, a software engineer having concrete evidence would be morally obligated to whistleblow.

In light of the emissions scandal, it is important to evaluate the overall culture of Volkswagen. This issue is not the only one in the company's history. Recently, Volkswagen gagged security researchers, who found a significant breach in keyless fobs, and prevented them from going public for two years. Thus, we can see that the lack of accountability for serious issues is pervasive in the company. In this case, not only computer professionals, but also the entire society should take action to ensure companies like Volkswagen do not take unethical actions similar to these. That can be achieved through educating the public about the importance of moral responsibility.
