The problem of radicalization by various terrorist groups has been around for several decades. With the rise of the social media, groups such as ISIS and al-Qaeda have and use the potential to reach and radicalize thousands of people. While preventing terrorists from posting on social media often conflicts with ideals of free speech, I will argue that it is ethical and necessary from a utilitarian perspective.

The issue of terrorism is one of the major points of unhappiness and fear in the modern Western society. Preventing more people from being radicalized by those extremist groups is therefore an important way to increase happiness in society. In addition to that, ensuring that such extreme form of hate speech is not present on social media will help reduce violent sentiment expressed by certain groups of people towards members of religious and ethnic groups. One argument against such regulation would be a limit on free speech. However, in this case this freedom of a small radical group of people to express themselves is causing the majority to suffer. It is clear that in this case that fundamental happiness of the society at large far outweighs the freedom of hate speech for small extremist groups.

It is clear that terrorist recruitement on social media is unethical from the utilitarian perspective. Note, that it does not matter whether we treat social media as a medium or as a place. It would not make a difference if one saw a member of an extremist group recruiting on the streets or on TV - in both cases such activity should be prevented. While there is certainly a blurry area of speech that might or might not be considered extremist, one can regulate the extreme case. Messages containing explicit calls to violence against groups of people or calls to join terrorist groups are examples of such extreme messages that should be regulated to increase the overall happiness of society. However, it is unethical to use such regulation against other types of speech, such as people expressing discontent with government or making fun of the aforementioned terrorist groups. In those cases, there is nothing to be gained for society if those messages are banned, while people will feel that their free speech is supressed. Thus, this regulation should be applied with care.

Establishing that very specific forms of extremist speech are unethical and should be regulated, it is important to decide on the methods to regulate them. Out of the Lessig's four modes of regulation, we can use either regulation by law or by code. Regulation by norms is not effective, since it is already a societal norm not to post hate speech on social media. While regulation by market is done implicitly by people unsubscribing from individuals posting extremist messages, it does not protect the majority from seeing an extreme form of hate speech on social media. Regulation by law is already employed in multiple countries, which means messages promoting explicit violence cause individuals who posted them to be arrested and prevented from causing more unhappiness in society. In addition, it is also vital to prevent those messages from appearing on social media websites in the first place. Algorithms and people at tech companies whose job is to moderate such content are extremely helpful in such scenario.

Regulating extremist messagase by law and code gives rise to an issue of censorship. By definition, such activity is considered censorship since it is designed to prevent society from seeing messages from certain individuals. While this is conflicting with those individuals' rights of free speech, consequence-based ethics gives us a clear answer that censorship is ethical in such case. While such regulation can be easily abused to limit the free speech of innocent people, companies such as Twitter and Facebook are on the right track to fight terrorism and promote happiness in society.
