Security vulnerabilities in devices may not only cause harm to the consumers but also have serious consequences for the company that created a product. A team of security researchers from MedSec discovered a vulnerability in pacemakers produced by St Jude Medical. Instead of notifying the company in accordance with the responsible disclosure model, they decided to take economic advantage of it and short-sold St Jude's stock. I will argue that such action is unethical from a consequence-based perspective. In addition to harming the manufacturer, MedSec jeopardized lives of people with the affected pacemakers.

In order to argue whether a certain action is ethical under the utilitarian model of ethics, one should consider all moral agents involved and measure social utility for each of them. In the case of the pacemaker vulnerability, the affected parties are St Jude Medical stockholders and employees, MedSec employees, and people who use the affected pacemakers. The consequences for the first two parties are simply economical. St Jude's stockholders lost various amounts of money, while MedSec researchers were able to gain that money. The case of consumers, however, is more significant. Software operating pacemakers is safety critical since it has direct control over thousands of human lives. Thus, the assets being protected include human lives in addition to the pacemaker devices themselves. Security objectives include preventing unauthorized tampering with the devices and maintaining normal operation without causing harm to the person wearing it. Since MedSec claims to have discovered a vulnerability that circumvents such security, thousands of lives are at risk. The decision of MedSec's employees to make money and not disclose the vulnerability immediately jeopardized the lives of people. Since economic gains and losses pale in comparison with people dying, MedSec's action is highly unethical from a utilitarian point of view.

One should also analyze the way the vulnerability was disclosed and the intentions of MedSec. The security researchers did not follow any of the traditional disclosure models, since they first disclosed it to a hedge fund to make profit, only to announce the vulnerability publicly, skipping any communications with the manufacturer of the pacemakers. Thus, regardless of MedSec's purpose as organization, they should be considered black hat hackers. They find a vulnerability and used it for personal gain. However, since they did not cause any direct harm such as tampering with real devices and causing people injuries or death, this would not be considered cyberterrorism. However, offenses such as insider trading, causing harm by negligence, and possibly false accusations (since they have not produced a proof of concept) would most certainly apply here. It is clear that MedSec is liable, morally responsibe, and accountable for harm caused by such unethical disclosure. We can only hold St Jude Medical accountable for fixing the issue as soon as possible, assuming the vulnerability was not introduced into code maliciously.

While we can clearly blame MedSec's employees, it is important to understand how to prevent such occurences in the future. The pacemaker industry should be subject to several of Lessig's modes of regulation. On one hand, after a vulnerability is made public, people stop buying the affected pacemakers, thereby implementing regulation by markets. However, replacing a pacemaker is a very expensive, complicated, and risky medical operation, thus society cannot simply rely on markets. Some of the possible solutions would be regulation by code, so that the pacemaker cannot be accessed using any wireless communications, or by law, establishing rigorous security checks and standards for such safety-critical devices. The information stored on the pacemakers include both proprietary code and sensitive personal health information. While it is important to ensure the privacy of health data, it may be necessary to force companies to disclose source code for pacemakers to allow independent security experts to analyze it before a device is released. This should be done to prevent any grave consequences in the future.
