Facebook's Trending feature allows users of the social network to browse and discuss the latest popular news. In order to address allegations of bias, Facebook replaced their staff curating the news with algorithm in August this year. However, this led to the circulation of fake news, some of which even got picked up by official Twitter accounts. I will argue that Facebook is morally responsible for filtering unverified arcticles in the Trending section from a duty-based perspective.

Millions of people use Facebook every day and see the latest headlines in the Trending section. The way the information is presented leads people to believe those news are trustworthy and verified the same way it is done at reliable news agencies such as New York Times. Thus, Facebook, as a news source, has an obligation to its users to verify all the news articles and ensure the information is obtained from reputable sources. The current state of news curation is therefore unethical from the deontological point of view. While the company is morally responsible for the propagation of misleading news, it can neither be held accountable nor liable. Individuals and organizations that started the spread of a fake article are accountable for it. In some cases they may also be liable under the defamation laws in the US. Despite that, it is in Facebook's best interest to combat the issue of fake news due to the trust its users put in the trending section. If such trust is lost, people will use other websites that do not break their obligations to their users. Facebook has multiple ways to work on the problem. It can use a fixed list of reputable sources for the trending section, develop an algorithm that will filter out fake news, or go back to having their employees moderate the news articles in Trending.

While the circulation of fake news through Facebook is unethical, there is another issue with the way news articles are presented to the users. Since people only see news relevant to their profile, they may not get content that supports points of view different from theirs. This creates echo chambers and contributes to polarizing the society. Since Facebook has a significant impact on society, it has a moral duty to prevent conflict. Thus, the social network is morally obligated to ensure people are exposed to diverse points of view. Both issues of fake news and echo chambers include some forms of censorship. In the case of unreliable news, censorship is ethical and is expected as a moral duty to the users. On the other hand, presenting users only with the information they agree with also falls within our definition of censorship. In this case, it goes against moral obligations, and therefore is unethical.

In order to combat the issues of fake news and social polarization, one needs some forms of regulation. Out of Lessig's four modes of regulation, markets has been shown to be ineffective. Regulation by market in this case would be people not believing the news and stopping the spread this way. However, this is largely not the case since people assume reliability of Facebook's Trending section. Regulation by law is also largely impossible due to free speech. Thus, we are left with a combination of regulation by code and by norms. Manual or automatic moderation coupled with mechanisms to ensure people are less exposed to fake news articles will solve the issue. Social network websites have a moral duty to the society to introduce such regulation.
